# SS-PsyPred

## Description

SS-PsyPred is an interpretable neural network model for predicting the pathogenicity of missense variants associated with brain disorders by using a sequence-structure joint learning framework to fully capture variant-related pathogenic features.

For a given missense variant, SS-PsyPred first employs a DNA language model (GPN-MSA) pretrained on multi-species whole-genome alignments to capture evolutionary conservation and long-range sequence context. Furthermore, a Transformer block is introduced to characterize the base representations generated by the DNA language model, thereby seizing function-related diverse information. Concurrently, residue-level graph neural networks are constructed from AlphaFold-predicted protein structures, where a graph attention network (GAT) explicitly models 3D spatial interactions and long-range dependencies among residues. Finally, a gated fusion module adaptively integrates the sequence and structural features, dynamically balancing their contributions for robust pathogenicity discrimination.

## Installation
### 2.1 Create an environment
SS-PsyPred is built on Python3.
We highly recommend to use a virtual environment for the installation of SS-PsyPred and its dependencies.    A virtual environment can be created and (de)activated as follows by using conda(https://conda.io/docs/):

```javascript
# create
$ conda create -n SS-PsyPred python=3.11
# activate
$ source activate SS-PsyPred
# deactivate
$ source deactivate
```
### 2.2 Install SS-PsyPred dependencies
> Note: If you are using a Python virtual environment, make sure it is activated before running each command in this guide.


#### 2.3.1 Install requirements
>Note: Typical install requirements time on a "normal" desktop computer is 10 minutes. This is an install example, you can also install the latest versions of pytorch and torch-geometric, but please pay attention to compatibility issues between versions when installing.

(1) Install pytorch 2.5.1 (For more details, please refer to https://pytorch.org/)
```
For linux:
# CUDA 12.1
$ pip install torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118
# CPU only
$ pip3 install torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cpu
```
(2) Install the requirements.
```
For linux:
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```
#### 2.3.2 Extraction the pretrained features generated by GPN-MSA
Download the source code of GPN-MSA from https://huggingface.co/songlab/gpn-msa-sapiens.

## Usage
### 3.1 Prepare Dataset
This section specifies the required data format, feature structure, and preprocessing procedures for the GSLM-DSM model.
### 3.1.1 Sequence Embedding Features
The model requires GPN-MSA embedding features for both the reference allele (ref) and alternative allele (alt).
Each feature corresponds to a 128 bp genomic sequence context and must be formatted as follows:
1. File format: .h5
2. Structure: dictionary
3. Keys:  unique sample identifiers, where the last character denotes the ground-truth label

### 3.1.2 Structural Features
Structural features are extracted using a graph-based encoder.To extract structural features, run the dedicated preprocessing script:
```
python train_GCN.py
python get_struct.py
```
The extracted features are pooled and fed into the main model as auxiliary input.
1. File format: .npy
2. Structure: dictionary
3. Keys: aligned with GPN-MSA features

### Data Placement and Model Execution
After preparing the structural features, place all feature files in the project root directory, then run the main pipeline:
```
python main.py
```
## Contact
Please contact the repository maintainer (haiyunz@foxmail.com)

